<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">An amour, which promises little good fortune, yet may be productive of much.</p>
			</header>
			<p>The next morning we were again visited by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burchell, though I began, for certain reasons, to be displeased with the frequency of his return; but I could not refuse him my company and fireside. It is true his labour more than requited his entertainment; for he wrought among us with vigour, and either in the meadow or at the hayrick put himself foremost. Besides, he had always something amusing to say that lessened our toil, and was at once so out of the way, and yet so sensible, that I loved, laughed at, and pitied him. My only dislike arose from an attachment he discovered to my daughter: he would, in a jesting manner, call her his little mistress, and when he bought each of the girls a set of ribbons, hers was the finest. I knew not how, but he every day seemed to become more amiable, his wit to improve, and his simplicity to assume the superior airs of wisdom.</p>
			<p>Our family dined in the field, and we sat, or rather reclined, round a temperate repast, our cloth spread upon the hay, while <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burchell gave cheerfulness to the feast. To heighten our satisfaction two blackbirds answered each other from opposite hedges, the familiar redbreast came and pecked the crumbs from our hands, and every sound seemed but the echo of tranquillity. “I never sit thus,” says Sophia, “but I think of the two lovers, so sweetly described by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gay, who were struck dead in each other’s arms. There is something so pathetic in the description, that I have read it an hundred times with new rapture.”⁠—“In my opinion,” cried my son, “the finest strokes in that description are much below those in the Acis and Galatea of Ovid. The Roman poet understands the use of <em>contrast</em> better, and upon that figure artfully managed all strength in the pathetic depends.”⁠—“It is remarkable,” cried <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burchell, “that both the poets you mention have equally contributed to introduce a false taste into their respective countries, by loading all their lines with epithet. Men of little genius found them most easily imitated in their defects, and English poetry, like that in the latter empire of Rome, is nothing at present but a combination of luxuriant images, without plot or connection; a string of epithets that improve the sound, without carrying on the sense. But perhaps, madam, while I thus reprehend others, you’ll think it just that I should give them an opportunity to retaliate, and indeed I have made this remark only to have an opportunity of introducing to the company a ballad, which, whatever be its other defects, is I think at least free from those I have mentioned.”</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<p>A ballad</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Turn, gentle hermit of the dale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guide my lonely way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where yon taper cheers the vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With hospitable ray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For here forlorn and lost I tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fainting steps and slow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where wilds immeasurably spread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seem lengthening as I go.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Forbear, my son,” the hermit cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“To tempt the dangerous gloom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For yonder faithless phantom flies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lure thee to thy doom.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Here to the houseless child of want,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My door is open still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though my portion is but scant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I give it with good will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then turn tonight, and freely share</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er my cell bestows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My rushy couch, and frugal fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My blessing and repose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“No flocks that range the valley free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To slaughter I condemn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taught by that power that pities me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I learn to pity them.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But from the mountain’s grassy side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A guiltless feast I bring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scrip with herbs and fruits supply’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And water from the spring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Then, pilgrim, turn, thy cares forego;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All earthborn cares are wrong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man wants but little here below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor wants that little long.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soft as the dew from heav’n descends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His gentle accents fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The modest stranger lowly bends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And follows to the cell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Far in a wilderness obscure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lonely mansion lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A refuge to the neighbouring poor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strangers led astray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No stores beneath its humble thatch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Requir’d a master’s care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wicket opening with a latch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Receiv’d the harmless pair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now when busy crowds retire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take their evening rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hermit trimm’d his little fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cheer’d his pensive guest:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And spread his vegetable store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gayly prest, and smil’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And skill’d in legendary lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lingering hours beguil’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Around in sympathetic mirth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its tricks the kitten tries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cricket chirrups in the hearth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The crackling faggot flies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But nothing could a charm impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To soothe the stranger’s woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For grief was heavy at his heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tears began to flow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His rising cares the hermit spy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With answering care opprest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And whence, unhappy youth,” he cry’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The sorrows of thy breast?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“From better habitations spurn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reluctant dost thou rove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or grieve for friendship unreturn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or unregarded love?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Alas! the joys that fortune brings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are trifling and decay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those who prize the paltry things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More trifling still than they.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And what is friendship but a name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A charm that lulls to sleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shade that follows wealth or fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leaves the wretch to weep?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And love is still an emptier sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The modern fair one’s jest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On earth unseen, or only found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To warm the turtle’s nest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For shame fond youth thy sorrows hush</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spurn the sex,” he said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But while he spoke a rising blush</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His lovelorn guest betray’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Surprised he sees new beauties rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swift mantling to the view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like colours o’er the morning skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As bright, as transient too.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The bashful look, the rising breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alternate spread alarms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lovely stranger stands confessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A maid in all her charms.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And, ah, forgive a stranger rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wretch forlorn,” she cry’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Whose feet unhallowed thus intrude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where heaven and you reside.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But let a maid thy pity share,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom love has taught to stray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who seeks for rest, but finds despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Companion of her way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My father liv’d beside the Tyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wealthy Lord was he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his wealth was mark’d as mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had but only me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“To win me from his tender arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unnumber’d suitors came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who prais’d me for imputed charms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And felt or feign’d a flame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Each hour a mercenary crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With richest proffers strove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the rest young Edwin bow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But never talk’d of love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In humble simplest habit clad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No wealth nor power had he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wisdom and worth were all he had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But these were all to me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The blossom opening to the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dews of heaven refin’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could nought of purity display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To emulate his mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The dew, the blossom on the tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With charms inconstant shine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their charms were his, but woe to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their constancy was mine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“For still I try’d each fickle art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Importunate and vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while his passion touch’d my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I triumph’d in his pain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Till quite dejected with my scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He left me to my pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sought a solitude forlorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In secret where he died.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But mine the sorrow, mine the fault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And well my life shall pay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll seek the solitude he sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stretch me where he lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And there forlorn despairing hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll lay me down and die:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas so for me that Edwin did,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so for him will I.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Forbid it heaven!” the hermit cry’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clasp’d her to his breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wondering fair one turn’d to chide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas Edwin’s self that prest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Turn, Angelina, ever dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My charmer, turn to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy own, thy long-lost Edwin here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Restor’d to love and thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus let me hold thee to my heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ev’ry care resign:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall we never, never part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My life⁠—my all that’s mine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“No, never, from this hour to part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We’ll live and love so true;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sigh that tends thy constant heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall break thy Edwin’s too.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>While this ballad was reading, Sophia seemed to mix an air of tenderness with her approbation. But our tranquillity was soon disturbed by the report of a gun just by us, and immediately after a man was seen bursting through the hedge, to take up the game he had killed. This sportsman was the Squire’s chaplain, who had shot one of the blackbirds that so agreeably entertained us. So loud a report, and so near, startled my daughters; and I could perceive that Sophia in the fright had thrown herself into <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burchell’s arms for protection. The gentleman came up, and asked pardon for having disturbed us, affirming that he was ignorant of our being so near. He therefore sat down by my youngest daughter, and, sportsman like, offered her what he had killed that morning. She was going to refuse, but a private look from her mother soon induced her to correct the mistake, and accept his present, though with some reluctance. My wife, as usual, discovered her pride in a whisper, observing, that Sophy had made a conquest of the chaplain, as well as her sister had of the Squire. I suspected, however, with more probability, that her affections were placed upon a different object. The chaplain’s errand was to inform us, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thornhill had provided music and refreshments, and intended that night giving the young ladies a ball by moonlight, on the grass-plot before our door. “Nor can I deny,” continued he, “but I have an interest in being first to deliver this message, as I expect for my reward to be honoured with miss Sophy’s hand as a partner.” To this my girl replied, that she should have no objection, if she could do it with honour: “But here,” continued she, “is a gentleman,” looking at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burchell, “who has been my companion in the task for the day, and it is fit he should share in its amusements.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burchell returned her a compliment for her intentions; but resigned her up to the chaplain, adding that he was to go that night five miles, being invited to an harvest supper. His refusal appeared to me a little extraordinary, nor could I conceive how so sensible a girl as my youngest, could thus prefer a man of broken fortunes to one whose expectations were much greater. But as men are most capable of distinguishing merit in women, so the ladies often form the truest judgments of us. The two sexes seem placed as spies upon each other, and are furnished with different abilities, adapted for mutual inspection.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
